# About

Jam is a graphical user interface for JoinMarket, and while obviously related,
is a separate project developed by a separate set of people.

## About Jam

Jam is a [free and open-source][license] project that aims to improve the
financial privacy of yourself and others, without relying on a trusted third
party. It was [started in 2021][bounty] by various volunteers and is still
developed and maintained on a volunteer basis. As mentioned above, Jam is a
front-end for JoinMarket, a privacy-focused bitcoin software that uses a
peer-to-peer marketplace to facilitate collaborative transactions.

The goal of Jam is to provide an interface that makes JoinMarket easier to use,
and thus more easily accessible for more people.

[license]: software/license.md
[bounty]: https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/issues/978

## About JoinMarket

[JoinMarket][jmcs] is a special kind of software that is aimed at improving the privacy
and fungibility of bitcoin transactions. The main way to improve privacy and
fungibility on-chain is via collaborative transactions.

[jmcs]: https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver

A collaborative transaction requires the coordination of multiple parties. The
right resources ([UTXOs][glossary]) have to be available in the right quantity
at the right time.

[glossary]: glossary.md

Consequently, the problem that needs to be solved is not a technological
problem, but an economic problem. JoinMarket solves this problem not by central
coordination, but by creating a market that allows participants to allocate
these resources in the best way, according to their individual needs.

## About the Name

The name "Jam" is a backronym, stands for [*JoinMarket's Awesome, Man*][name],
and shouldn't be taken too seriously. However, it works on multiple levels
(*Let's jam the signal!*) and "cooking jam" is also a fun metaphor  for mixing
something in a tasty way (and putting it in [jars][glossary]).

<center>
![](assets/spaceballs.gif)
</center>

[name]: https://github.com/joinmarket-webui/jam/issues/22#issuecomment-1024654436

## About the Philosophy

We believe that, in the long run, open protocols will survive. Platforms, on the
other hand, are run by companies and all companies eventually go bankrupt.

The motivation behind Jam (and JoinMarketâ€”and Bitcoin, for that matter) is to
build something that doesn't go away.

[:octicons-arrow-right-24: Motivation][motivation]

[motivation]: philosophy/00-motivation.md
